Documentation/Collector/API-TESTING.md, before:

# UniFi API Testing Guide

## Overview

The `test-integration-api.sh` script is a diagnostic tool that validates connectivity to your UniFi controller and tests all API endpoints used by the collector. This is useful for:

- **Pre-deployment validation** - Verify API access before installing the full collector
- **Troubleshooting** - Diagnose connectivity or authentication issues
- **API exploration** - Understand which endpoints return data for your environment
- **Version compatibility** - Compare Integration API v1 vs Legacy API responses

## What This Script Tests

The script performs comprehensive API testing:

### Integration API v1 Endpoints (12 endpoints)

- Sites discovery
- Devices, Clients, Networks, WiFi
- Traffic matching lists, Firewall zones, ACL rules
- RADIUS profiles, Device tags
- DPI categories and applications
- WANs, VPN servers

### Legacy API Endpoints (7 endpoints)

- Security alarms (IDS/IPS detections)
- Events (network activity)
- Port forwarding rules
- Routing configuration
- Site settings
- Health status
- Devices (legacy format)
- Clients (legacy format)

### Comparison Analysis

- Record count comparison between v1 and Legacy APIs
- Field structure analysis
- Data completeness validation

## Prerequisites

Before running the test script:

- [x] UniFi Controller accessible via HTTPS
- [x] Valid API key generated (see [README.md](README.md#generate-unifi-api-key))
- [x] Network connectivity from test machine to controller (port 443)
- [x] `curl` and `jq` installed on test machine

## Installation

The script is standalone and doesn't require installation:

```bash
# Download or copy the script
cd /path/to/sentinel-unifi/Collector

# Make it executable
chmod +x test-integration-api.sh

# Verify dependencies
which curl jq
```

## Running the Test

### Method 1: Environment Variables (Recommended)

```bash
# Set your controller details
export CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"      # Your controller IP
export API_KEY="your-api-key-here"     # From controller admin panel

# Run the test
./test-integration-api.sh
```

### Method 2: Inline Variables

```bash
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10" API_KEY="your-api-key-here" ./test-integration-api.sh
```

### Test Execution Flow

The script executes in 4 steps:

Step 1: Get Site UUID

- Tests connectivity to controller
- Retrieves site information
- Extracts site UUID needed for v1 API calls

Step 2: Test Integration API v1 Endpoints

- Tests all 12 v1 endpoints
- Saves responses to `./api-test-results/v1_*.json`
- Reports success/failure and record counts

Step 3: Test Legacy API Endpoints

- Tests 6 legacy endpoints
- Saves responses to `./api-test-results/legacy_*.json`
- Reports success/failure and record counts

Step 4: Generate Comparison Report

- Compares v1 vs Legacy record counts
- Identifies data discrepancies
- Provides next steps

## Understanding the Output

### Console Output

#### Successful Endpoint Test

```text
[INFO] Testing: /v1/sites/507f1f77bcf86cd799439011/devices
[SUCCESS] HTTP 200 | Records: 12
[INFO] Sample fields: ["id","macAddress","ipAddress","name","model","state"]
```

#### Failed Endpoint Test

```text
[INFO] Testing: /v1/sites/507f1f77bcf86cd799439011/acl-rules
[ERROR] HTTP 404 | Endpoint not found
```

#### Comparison Summary

```text
========================================
Data Comparison
========================================

Devices:
  Integration API v1: 12 records
  Legacy API: 12 records
[SUCCESS] Record counts match

Clients:
  Integration API v1: 45 records
  Legacy API: 48 records
[WARNING] Record count mismatch!
```

### Output Files

All responses are saved to `./api-test-results/`:

| File Pattern | Description | API Type |
|--------------|-------------|----------|
| `sites.json` | Site information and UUIDs | Integration v1 |
| `v1_devices.json` | Device data from v1 API | Integration v1 |
| `v1_clients.json` | Client data from v1 API | Integration v1 |
| `v1_networks.json` | Network config from v1 API | Integration v1 |
| `legacy_devices-legacy.json` | Device data from legacy API | Legacy |
| `legacy_clients-legacy.json` | Client data from legacy API | Legacy |
| `legacy_port-forward.json` | Port forwarding rules | Legacy |
| `legacy_health.json` | System health metrics | Legacy |

### Inspecting Output Files

#### View JSON Structure

```bash
# Pretty-print first record from devices endpoint
jq '.data[0]' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json

# Count records
jq '.count' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json

# List all field names
jq '.data[0] | keys' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json
```

#### Check Response Format

```bash
# Integration API v1 format
{
  "count": 12,
  "data": [
    { "id": "...", "name": "...", ... }
  ]
}

# Legacy API format
{
  "data": [
    { "_id": "...", "name": "...", ... }
  ],
  "meta": { "rc": "ok" }
}
```

## Interpreting Results

### All Tests Pass ✅

```text
Integration API v1 Endpoints:
-----------------------------
devices                        ✓ (Records: 12)
clients                        ✓ (Records: 45)
networks                       ✓ (Records: 8)
wifi-broadcasts                ✓ (Records: 5)
...

Legacy API Endpoints:
-----------------------------
alarms                         ✓ (Records: 12)
events                         ✓ (Records: 156)
port-forward                   ✓ (Records: 3)
health                         ✓ (Records: 7)
...
```

**Meaning:** Your API key has full access, and all endpoints are working.

**Next Steps:**

1. Proceed with collector installation
2. Use the record counts to estimate data volume
3. Save the JSON files for schema reference

### Partial Success ⚠️

Some endpoints return data, others fail:

```text
devices                        ✓ (Records: 12)
clients                        ✓ (Records: 45)
acl-rules                      ✗ HTTP 404
vpn-servers                    ✗ HTTP 404
```

**Meaning:**

- Your API key works but may have limited permissions
- Some features aren't configured in your controller (e.g., no VPN servers)
- Some endpoints require specific UniFi OS versions

**Next Steps:**

1. Check if missing data is expected (e.g., no VPNs = no vpn-servers data)
2. Verify API key has admin permissions
3. Check UniFi Controller version (Integration API v1 requires UniFi OS 3.0+)

### Authentication Failure ❌

```text
[ERROR] Failed to get site UUID - cannot continue
[ERROR] HTTP 401 | Unauthorized
```

**Meaning:** API key is invalid or expired.

**Solution:**

1. Regenerate API key in UniFi Controller
2. Verify you copied the entire key (no spaces/truncation)
3. Check API key hasn't been revoked

### Connection Failure ❌

```text
[ERROR] HTTP 000 | Request failed
curl: (7) Failed to connect to 192.0.2.10 port 443: Connection refused
```

**Meaning:** Cannot reach controller.

**Solution:**

1. Verify controller IP address
2. Check firewall rules allow outbound HTTPS (port 443)
3. Verify controller is online: `ping 192.0.2.10`
4. Test HTTPS access: `curl -k https://192.0.2.10:443`

## Common Issues

### Issue 1: Record Count Mismatches Between v1 and Legacy

**Symptom:**

```text
Clients:
  Integration API v1: 45 records
  Legacy API: 48 records
[WARNING] Record count mismatch!
```

**Possible Causes:**

- Legacy API includes disconnected clients (historical data)
- Integration API v1 only shows currently connected clients
- API pagination (unlikely with default limits)

**Solution:**

- This is often expected behavior
- The collector uses v1 API where available
- Check `./api-test-results/` files to see which records differ

### Issue 2: Empty Data Arrays

**Symptom:**

```text
[SUCCESS] HTTP 200 | Records: 0
```

**Meaning:** Endpoint works but no data exists.

**Common Reasons:**

- `acl-rules` - No custom ACL rules created via API
- `vpn-servers` - No VPN endpoints configured
- `device-tags` - No tags applied to devices
- `hotspot-vouchers` - No guest vouchers active

**Action:** This is normal if you haven't configured these features.

### Issue 3: 404 Errors on Valid Endpoints

**Symptom:**

```text
[ERROR] HTTP 404 | Endpoint not found
```

**Possible Causes:**

1. **UniFi OS version too old** - Integration API v1 requires UniFi OS 3.0+
2. **Cloud controller differences** - Some endpoints behave differently on cloud
3. **Network Application version** - Older versions missing newer endpoints

**Solution:**

```bash
# Check controller version
curl -k "https://$CONTROLLER_IP:443/proxy/network/api/s/default/stat/sysinfo" \
  -H "X-API-Key: $API_KEY" | jq '.data[0].version'

# Required: UniFi Network Application 7.3+ or UniFi OS 3.0+
```

### Issue 4: SSL Certificate Errors

**Symptom:**

```text
curl: (60) SSL certificate problem: self-signed certificate
```

**Note:** The script uses `-k` flag to ignore SSL certificate validation. If you're still seeing this:

**Solution:**

```bash
# Verify curl version supports -k flag
curl --version

# Test with explicit --insecure flag
curl --insecure "https://$CONTROLLER_IP:443/proxy/network/api/s/default/stat/device" \
  -H "X-API-Key: $API_KEY"
```

## Integration API v1 vs Legacy API

### When to Use Each API

| Feature | Integration API v1 | Legacy API | Collector Uses |
|---------|-------------------|------------|----------------|
| Devices | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Clients | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Networks | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| WiFi | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Port Forwarding | ❌ Not available | ✅ Only option | Legacy |
| Health Metrics | ❌ Not available | ✅ Only option | Legacy |
| Events | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Firewall Rules | ✅ Preferred (ACL) | ✅ Available | v1 |

### Key Differences

**Integration API v1:**

- Modern RESTful design
- Consistent schema across endpoints
- Better field naming (camelCase)
- Pagination support
- Official Ubiquiti support

**Legacy API:**

- Older design, less consistent
- Some endpoints only available here
- Underscore field names (`_id`, `_source`)
- Will be deprecated eventually

### Collector Strategy

The collector uses a **hybrid approach**:

1. Integration API v1 for all modern endpoints (12 endpoints)
2. Legacy API only where necessary (3 endpoints: port-forward, health, events)

## Using Test Results

### Schema Design

The JSON output files are useful for understanding field structures:

```bash
# Extract all field names from devices
jq '[.data[] | keys] | add | unique' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json

# Find device models in your network
jq '.data[].model' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json | sort -u

# Check network purposes
jq '.data[].purpose' ./api-test-results/v1_networks.json | sort -u
```

### Data Volume Estimation

Use record counts to estimate Sentinel ingestion costs:

```bash
# Sum all record counts
for file in ./api-test-results/v1_*.json; do
  echo "$(basename $file): $(jq '.count // 0' $file) records"
done | awk '{sum+=$2} END {print "Total: " sum " records per collection cycle"}'
```

**Example Calculation:**

- 100 total records per cycle
- 12 collections per hour (5min interval)
- 1,200 records/hour × 24 hours = 28,800 records/day
- Average record size: 2 KB
- Daily ingestion: ~56 MB/day

### Troubleshooting Collector Issues

If the collector isn't working, run this test script to isolate the issue:

```bash
# Use same credentials as collector
export CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"
export API_KEY="your-key"

./test-integration-api.sh

# If test script works but collector doesn't:
# - Check collector logs: journalctl -u unifi-collector@devices.service
# - Verify collector config: cat /opt/unifi-collector/config/controllers.conf
# - Check file permissions: ls -la /var/log/unifi/
```

## Advanced Usage

### Testing Multiple Controllers

```bash
# Test controller 1
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10" API_KEY="key1" ./test-integration-api.sh
mv ./api-test-results ./api-test-results-site1

# Test controller 2
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.20" API_KEY="key2" ./test-integration-api.sh
mv ./api-test-results ./api-test-results-site2

# Compare results
diff <(jq '.count' ./api-test-results-site1/v1_devices.json) \
     <(jq '.count' ./api-test-results-site2/v1_devices.json)
```

### Automated Testing

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Test script for CI/CD pipelines

CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"
API_KEY="$UNIFI_API_KEY"  # From environment

# Run test
if ./test-integration-api.sh > test-output.log 2>&1; then
  echo "✅ API test passed"
  exit 0
else
  echo "❌ API test failed"
  cat test-output.log
  exit 1
fi
```

### Custom Endpoint Testing

To test a specific endpoint not in the script:

```bash
# Test custom endpoint
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"
API_KEY="your-key"
SITE_UUID="507f1f77bcf86cd799439011"

curl -k "https://${CONTROLLER_IP}:443/proxy/network/integration/v1/sites/${SITE_UUID}/your-endpoint" \
  -H "X-API-Key: ${API_KEY}" \
  -H "Accept: application/json" | jq .
```

## Next Steps

After running the API test:

### If All Tests Pass

1. Proceed with [collector installation](README.md#installation)
2. Configure controllers.conf with your credentials
3. Deploy DCRs to Azure (see [../DCR/README.md](../DCR/README.md))

### If Tests Fail

1. Review error messages in console output
2. Check [Common Issues](#common-issues) section
3. Verify UniFi Controller version and API key permissions
4. Open GitHub issue with test output if you need help

### For API Exploration

1. Review JSON files in `./api-test-results/`
2. Understand your network's data structure
3. Customize collector or transformations as needed

## Additional Resources

- **Collector Setup Guide**: [README.md](README.md)
- **DCR Deployment**: [../DCR/README.md](../DCR/README.md)
- **Main Testing Guide**: [../../README.md](../../README.md)

## Support

For API testing issues:

1. Run the test script with your credentials
2. Save the console output and `./api-test-results/` directory
3. Open a GitHub issue with:
   - Controller type (UDM-Pro, CloudKey, self-hosted, etc.)
   - UniFi OS version
   - Network Application version
   - Test output and any error messages

**Current Version:** 2.1.0
**Last Updated:** December 2025

Commit message:

Improves documentation for cost estimation
Refines cost estimation guidance in the documentation to reflect
Azure Log Analytics pricing, data ingestion volume, and related
factors. Updates wording for clarity and accuracy. Directs users
to the Azure Pricing Calculator and performance benchmarks for
accurate cost assessment.

Documentation/Collector/API-TESTING.md, after:

# UniFi API Testing Guide

## Overview

The `test-integration-api.sh` script is a diagnostic tool that validates connectivity to your UniFi controller and tests all API endpoints used by the collector. This is useful for:

- **Pre-deployment validation** - Verify API access before installing the full collector
- **Troubleshooting** - Diagnose connectivity or authentication issues
- **API exploration** - Understand which endpoints return data for your environment
- **Version compatibility** - Compare Integration API v1 vs Legacy API responses

## What This Script Tests

The script performs comprehensive API testing:

### Integration API v1 Endpoints (12 endpoints)

- Sites discovery
- Devices, Clients, Networks, WiFi
- Traffic matching lists, Firewall zones, ACL rules
- RADIUS profiles, Device tags
- DPI categories and applications
- WANs, VPN servers

### Legacy API Endpoints (7 endpoints)

- Security alarms (IDS/IPS detections)
- Events (network activity)
- Port forwarding rules
- Routing configuration
- Site settings
- Health status
- Devices (legacy format)
- Clients (legacy format)

### Comparison Analysis

- Record count comparison between v1 and Legacy APIs
- Field structure analysis
- Data completeness validation

## Prerequisites

Before running the test script:

- [x] UniFi Controller accessible via HTTPS
- [x] Valid API key generated (see [README.md](README.md#generate-unifi-api-key))
- [x] Network connectivity from test machine to controller (port 443)
- [x] `curl` and `jq` installed on test machine

## Installation

The script is standalone and doesn't require installation:

```bash
# Download or copy the script
cd /path/to/sentinel-unifi/Collector

# Make it executable
chmod +x test-integration-api.sh

# Verify dependencies
which curl jq
```

## Running the Test

### Method 1: Environment Variables (Recommended)

```bash
# Set your controller details
export CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"      # Your controller IP
export API_KEY="your-api-key-here"     # From controller admin panel

# Run the test
./test-integration-api.sh
```

### Method 2: Inline Variables

```bash
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10" API_KEY="your-api-key-here" ./test-integration-api.sh
```

### Test Execution Flow

The script executes in 4 steps:

Step 1: Get Site UUID

- Tests connectivity to controller
- Retrieves site information
- Extracts site UUID needed for v1 API calls

Step 2: Test Integration API v1 Endpoints

- Tests all 12 v1 endpoints
- Saves responses to `./api-test-results/v1_*.json`
- Reports success/failure and record counts

Step 3: Test Legacy API Endpoints

- Tests 6 legacy endpoints
- Saves responses to `./api-test-results/legacy_*.json`
- Reports success/failure and record counts

Step 4: Generate Comparison Report

- Compares v1 vs Legacy record counts
- Identifies data discrepancies
- Provides next steps

## Understanding the Output

### Console Output

#### Successful Endpoint Test

```text
[INFO] Testing: /v1/sites/507f1f77bcf86cd799439011/devices
[SUCCESS] HTTP 200 | Records: 12
[INFO] Sample fields: ["id","macAddress","ipAddress","name","model","state"]
```

#### Failed Endpoint Test

```text
[INFO] Testing: /v1/sites/507f1f77bcf86cd799439011/acl-rules
[ERROR] HTTP 404 | Endpoint not found
```

#### Comparison Summary

```text
========================================
Data Comparison
========================================

Devices:
  Integration API v1: 12 records
  Legacy API: 12 records
[SUCCESS] Record counts match

Clients:
  Integration API v1: 45 records
  Legacy API: 48 records
[WARNING] Record count mismatch!
```

### Output Files

All responses are saved to `./api-test-results/`:

| File Pattern | Description | API Type |
|--------------|-------------|----------|
| `sites.json` | Site information and UUIDs | Integration v1 |
| `v1_devices.json` | Device data from v1 API | Integration v1 |
| `v1_clients.json` | Client data from v1 API | Integration v1 |
| `v1_networks.json` | Network config from v1 API | Integration v1 |
| `legacy_devices-legacy.json` | Device data from legacy API | Legacy |
| `legacy_clients-legacy.json` | Client data from legacy API | Legacy |
| `legacy_port-forward.json` | Port forwarding rules | Legacy |
| `legacy_health.json` | System health metrics | Legacy |

### Inspecting Output Files

#### View JSON Structure

```bash
# Pretty-print first record from devices endpoint
jq '.data[0]' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json

# Count records
jq '.count' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json

# List all field names
jq '.data[0] | keys' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json
```

#### Check Response Format

```bash
# Integration API v1 format
{
  "count": 12,
  "data": [
    { "id": "...", "name": "...", ... }
  ]
}

# Legacy API format
{
  "data": [
    { "_id": "...", "name": "...", ... }
  ],
  "meta": { "rc": "ok" }
}
```

## Interpreting Results

### All Tests Pass ✅

```text
Integration API v1 Endpoints:
-----------------------------
devices                        ✓ (Records: 12)
clients                        ✓ (Records: 45)
networks                       ✓ (Records: 8)
wifi-broadcasts                ✓ (Records: 5)
...

Legacy API Endpoints:
-----------------------------
alarms                         ✓ (Records: 12)
events                         ✓ (Records: 156)
port-forward                   ✓ (Records: 3)
health                         ✓ (Records: 7)
...
```

**Meaning:** Your API key has full access, and all endpoints are working.

**Next Steps:**

1. Proceed with collector installation
2. Use the record counts to estimate data volume
3. Save the JSON files for schema reference

### Partial Success ⚠️

Some endpoints return data, others fail:

```text
devices                        ✓ (Records: 12)
clients                        ✓ (Records: 45)
acl-rules                      ✗ HTTP 404
vpn-servers                    ✗ HTTP 404
```

**Meaning:**

- Your API key works but may have limited permissions
- Some features aren't configured in your controller (e.g., no VPN servers)
- Some endpoints require specific UniFi OS versions

**Next Steps:**

1. Check if missing data is expected (e.g., no VPNs = no vpn-servers data)
2. Verify API key has admin permissions
3. Check UniFi Controller version (Integration API v1 requires UniFi OS 3.0+)

### Authentication Failure ❌

```text
[ERROR] Failed to get site UUID - cannot continue
[ERROR] HTTP 401 | Unauthorized
```

**Meaning:** API key is invalid or expired.

**Solution:**

1. Regenerate API key in UniFi Controller
2. Verify you copied the entire key (no spaces/truncation)
3. Check API key hasn't been revoked

### Connection Failure ❌

```text
[ERROR] HTTP 000 | Request failed
curl: (7) Failed to connect to 192.0.2.10 port 443: Connection refused
```

**Meaning:** Cannot reach controller.

**Solution:**

1. Verify controller IP address
2. Check firewall rules allow outbound HTTPS (port 443)
3. Verify controller is online: `ping 192.0.2.10`
4. Test HTTPS access: `curl -k https://192.0.2.10:443`

## Common Issues

### Issue 1: Record Count Mismatches Between v1 and Legacy

**Symptom:**

```text
Clients:
  Integration API v1: 45 records
  Legacy API: 48 records
[WARNING] Record count mismatch!
```

**Possible Causes:**

- Legacy API includes disconnected clients (historical data)
- Integration API v1 only shows currently connected clients
- API pagination (unlikely with default limits)

**Solution:**

- This is often expected behavior
- The collector uses v1 API where available
- Check `./api-test-results/` files to see which records differ

### Issue 2: Empty Data Arrays

**Symptom:**

```text
[SUCCESS] HTTP 200 | Records: 0
```

**Meaning:** Endpoint works but no data exists.

**Common Reasons:**

- `acl-rules` - No custom ACL rules created via API
- `vpn-servers` - No VPN endpoints configured
- `device-tags` - No tags applied to devices
- `hotspot-vouchers` - No guest vouchers active

**Action:** This is normal if you haven't configured these features.

### Issue 3: 404 Errors on Valid Endpoints

**Symptom:**

```text
[ERROR] HTTP 404 | Endpoint not found
```

**Possible Causes:**

1. **UniFi OS version too old** - Integration API v1 requires UniFi OS 3.0+
2. **Cloud controller differences** - Some endpoints behave differently on cloud
3. **Network Application version** - Older versions missing newer endpoints

**Solution:**

```bash
# Check controller version
curl -k "https://$CONTROLLER_IP:443/proxy/network/api/s/default/stat/sysinfo" \
  -H "X-API-Key: $API_KEY" | jq '.data[0].version'

# Required: UniFi Network Application 7.3+ or UniFi OS 3.0+
```

### Issue 4: SSL Certificate Errors

**Symptom:**

```text
curl: (60) SSL certificate problem: self-signed certificate
```

**Note:** The script uses `-k` flag to ignore SSL certificate validation. If you're still seeing this:

**Solution:**

```bash
# Verify curl version supports -k flag
curl --version

# Test with explicit --insecure flag
curl --insecure "https://$CONTROLLER_IP:443/proxy/network/api/s/default/stat/device" \
  -H "X-API-Key: $API_KEY"
```

## Integration API v1 vs Legacy API

### When to Use Each API

| Feature | Integration API v1 | Legacy API | Collector Uses |
|---------|-------------------|------------|----------------|
| Devices | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Clients | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Networks | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| WiFi | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Port Forwarding | ❌ Not available | ✅ Only option | Legacy |
| Health Metrics | ❌ Not available | ✅ Only option | Legacy |
| Events | ✅ Preferred | ✅ Available | v1 |
| Firewall Rules | ✅ Preferred (ACL) | ✅ Available | v1 |

### Key Differences

**Integration API v1:**

- Modern RESTful design
- Consistent schema across endpoints
- Better field naming (camelCase)
- Pagination support
- Official Ubiquiti support

**Legacy API:**

- Older design, less consistent
- Some endpoints only available here
- Underscore field names (`_id`, `_source`)
- Will be deprecated eventually

### Collector Strategy

The collector uses a **hybrid approach**:

1. Integration API v1 for all modern endpoints (12 endpoints)
2. Legacy API only where necessary (3 endpoints: port-forward, health, events)

## Using Test Results

### Schema Design

The JSON output files are useful for understanding field structures:

```bash
# Extract all field names from devices
jq '[.data[] | keys] | add | unique' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json

# Find device models in your network
jq '.data[].model' ./api-test-results/v1_devices.json | sort -u

# Check network purposes
jq '.data[].purpose' ./api-test-results/v1_networks.json | sort -u
```

### Data Volume Estimation

Use record counts to estimate data ingestion volume:

```bash
# Sum all record counts
for file in ./api-test-results/v1_*.json; do
  echo "$(basename $file): $(jq '.count // 0' $file) records"
done | awk '{sum+=$2} END {print "Total: " sum " records per collection cycle"}'
```

**Example Calculation:**

- 100 total records per cycle
- 12 collections per hour (5min interval)
- 1,200 records/hour × 24 hours = 28,800 records/day
- Average record size: ~2 KB
- Estimated daily ingestion: ~56 MB/day

**Note:** Use this volume estimate to plan your Azure Log Analytics deployment. See the main [Performance Benchmarks](../../README.md#performance-benchmarks) for typical data volumes by network size.

### Troubleshooting Collector Issues

If the collector isn't working, run this test script to isolate the issue:

```bash
# Use same credentials as collector
export CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"
export API_KEY="your-key"

./test-integration-api.sh

# If test script works but collector doesn't:
# - Check collector logs: journalctl -u unifi-collector@devices.service
# - Verify collector config: cat /opt/unifi-collector/config/controllers.conf
# - Check file permissions: ls -la /var/log/unifi/
```

## Advanced Usage

### Testing Multiple Controllers

```bash
# Test controller 1
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10" API_KEY="key1" ./test-integration-api.sh
mv ./api-test-results ./api-test-results-site1

# Test controller 2
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.20" API_KEY="key2" ./test-integration-api.sh
mv ./api-test-results ./api-test-results-site2

# Compare results
diff <(jq '.count' ./api-test-results-site1/v1_devices.json) \
     <(jq '.count' ./api-test-results-site2/v1_devices.json)
```

### Automated Testing

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Test script for CI/CD pipelines

CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"
API_KEY="$UNIFI_API_KEY"  # From environment

# Run test
if ./test-integration-api.sh > test-output.log 2>&1; then
  echo "✅ API test passed"
  exit 0
else
  echo "❌ API test failed"
  cat test-output.log
  exit 1
fi
```

### Custom Endpoint Testing

To test a specific endpoint not in the script:

```bash
# Test custom endpoint
CONTROLLER_IP="192.0.2.10"
API_KEY="your-key"
SITE_UUID="507f1f77bcf86cd799439011"

curl -k "https://${CONTROLLER_IP}:443/proxy/network/integration/v1/sites/${SITE_UUID}/your-endpoint" \
  -H "X-API-Key: ${API_KEY}" \
  -H "Accept: application/json" | jq .
```

## Next Steps

After running the API test:

### If All Tests Pass

1. Proceed with [collector installation](README.md#installation)
2. Configure controllers.conf with your credentials
3. Deploy DCRs to Azure (see [../DCR/README.md](../DCR/README.md))

### If Tests Fail

1. Review error messages in console output
2. Check [Common Issues](#common-issues) section
3. Verify UniFi Controller version and API key permissions
4. Open GitHub issue with test output if you need help

### For API Exploration

1. Review JSON files in `./api-test-results/`
2. Understand your network's data structure
3. Customize collector or transformations as needed

## Additional Resources

- **Collector Setup Guide**: [README.md](README.md)
- **DCR Deployment**: [../DCR/README.md](../DCR/README.md)
- **Main Testing Guide**: [../../README.md](../../README.md)

## Support

For API testing issues:

1. Run the test script with your credentials
2. Save the console output and `./api-test-results/` directory
3. Open a GitHub issue with:
   - Controller type (UDM-Pro, CloudKey, self-hosted, etc.)
   - UniFi OS version
   - Network Application version
   - Test output and any error messages

**Current Version:** 2.1.0
**Last Updated:** December 2025
